(Please ensure that the accompanying README.TXT is included with every
Glk distribution, as it describes for users some of the limitations of
Glk Hugo vs. a fully featured port.)


PORTER'S NOTES ON GLK HUGO
--------------------------

This is a relatively basic port of Hugo to Glk, but it seems to do the
job, at least for simple, text-based games.

The file heglk.c includes most of the interface layer.  More complex
startup code and system-specific implementations of a few non-portable
functions (such as window-titling and error-messaging) may be provided
in a separate file.  (The Windows file heglkwin.c is included in this 
package as an example.)

It is possible to implement the sound and graphics functions 
independently of Glk.  For instance, a port could display an image in 
a modal window outside of the Glk frame (or multiple images in multiple 
modal windows).  An ambitious porter should be able to do something 
like this without too much difficulty.  On the other hand, I've not yet
had a chance to play with the new Glk graphics capabilities, but I'm
hoping that for the most part it can be integrated into heglk.c.


TO BUILD GLK HUGO
-----------------

You'll need to do the following:

1.  Unpack this archive (hugov*_glk_source.zip) and the main source
    distribution (hugov*_source.tar.gz).

2.  Implement any startup code or system-specific replacement
    functions desired.

3.  Link with the Glk library.


REVISION HISTORY
----------------

25-01-99  Glk Hugo beta uploaded to ftp.gmd.de; works with Win32

28-01-99  Minor fix to accommodate non-proportional text in menu
	  positioning

31-01-99  Changed zoom/shrink auxwin to open/close

04-02-99  Incorporated Andrew's Glk implementation into the main
	  code base

10-02-99  Glk Hugo uploaded to ftp.gmd.de, in both Win32 and Mac
	  incarnations.
	  
12-02-99  Modified keywait cursor functionality; added Torbjorn
	  Anderson's modified Unix makefile, and Joe Mason's
	  CheapGlk patch


Kent Tessman
February 10, 1999
